SUBLINE
=======

INSTALLING
Open Subline right from this window. It moves itself to the Applications
folder and restarts from there. Without administrator rights, Subline goes
to the Applications folder inside your home folder.

You can also install Subline by hand. Drag its icon onto the Applications
folder next to it and launch Subline from the Applications folder.

IF macOS WON'T OPEN THE APP
The app isn't notarized by Apple, so on the first launch macOS may show
a warning ("cannot verify the developer" or "Apple could not verify it is free
of malware"). You only need to allow it once.

  • On macOS 15 and later, close the warning with "Done", open System
    Settings, go to Privacy & Security, scroll down, click "Open Anyway"
    next to Subline and confirm.

  • On macOS 13–14, right-click Subline in Finder, choose "Open", then click
    "Open" again in the warning.

  • If that didn't help, drag Subline onto the Applications folder, open
    Terminal and run:
        xattr -dr com.apple.quarantine /Applications/Subline.app

FIRST LAUNCH
1. On the left, click "Download Model", that is Whisper Large v3 Turbo
   (about 870 MB). The speech recognition model is downloaded once, after
   that everything works offline. Other models, including ones fine-tuned
   on Russian speech, are under the "Models" button.
2. Drop a video in any format onto the window (MP4, MOV, MKV, AVI, WEBM…).
3. Recognition starts on its own. You can fix the text in the list on the left.
4. On the right, in the style panel, set up the preset: font, size, color,
   position, number of lines (1 to 3), case and punctuation. Sizes and
   coordinates are in pixels of the frame. You can drag subtitles right
   on the video.
5. The "Export" button at the top right saves the video with burned-in
   subtitles as MP4. The arrow next to it offers HEVC, ProRes, a transparent
   ProRes 4444 layer for editing, or an SRT file.

LANGUAGE
Subline works in Russian and English. It uses the first of your preferred
macOS languages that it has, and English if it has none of them. To choose
a language just for Subline, open System Settings > General > Language &
Region, add Subline under Applications with the language you want, and
restart the app. The "Change" button in Subline's Settings (⌘,) opens the
same place.

FORMER NAME
Before version 2.0 the app was called Subtits. On the first launch Subline
takes over its presets, downloaded models, fonts and saved transcripts, so
you don't need to download the models again. You can delete the old Subtits.

SUBTITLE EDITOR
At the top of the style panel, choose what your changes apply to.
  • "All" changes the common style (the preset) of all subtitles.
  • "Group" changes the subtitles of one group, for example a second
    speaker at the top of the frame.
  • "Subtitle" changes only the selected subtitles (⌘-click or ⇧-click
    in the list) or the one on screen now. Such a subtitle can have its own
    font, color and position.
  • "Words" works with the words you click right on the video (hold ⇧ to pick
    several). They can get their own color, font, size, slant, UPPERCASE
    and a highlight plate.
The name of a changed property is in bold. The arrow next to it brings back
the common style.

FONTS
Montserrat, Manrope, Oswald, Unbounded, Dela Gothic One, Playfair Display,
Cormorant Garamond and Caveat are built into the app and look the same
on every Mac. The font library (⇧⌘T) has 43 more free fonts with Cyrillic,
each installs with one button. Paid fonts (Stapel, Akkordeon) are bought on
the foundry's site, then their files are dropped onto the library window.

PLAYBACK AND SHORTCUTS
  Space ............. play / pause (or click the video)
  ← / → ............. one frame back / forward
  ⇧← / ⇧→ ........... one second back / forward
  ↑ / ↓ ............. previous / next subtitle
  Return or Esc ..... finish editing the text
  ⌘B ................ split the subtitle at the text cursor or the playhead
  ⌘J ................ merge the subtitle with the next one
  ⌥⌘↑ / ⌥⌘↓ ......... move a word to the previous / next subtitle
  ⌘G ................ group the selected subtitles
  ⌥⌘C / ⌥⌘V ......... copy / paste style
  Esc ............... back to "All subtitles"
  ⌘Z / ⇧⌘Z .......... undo / redo
  ⌘S ................ save the edits
  ⌘E ................ save the video with subtitles
  ⌥⌘I ............... show / hide the style panel
  ⌘, ................ settings (language, sounds, menu bar icon, updates)
  ⌘? ................ Subline Help

PRESETS
You can share presets with colleagues. Open the "…" menu next to the preset
and choose "Export Preset…" or "Import Presets…".

UPDATES
Subline looks for a new version on GitHub right after launch and then every
three hours. It downloads a new version by itself, checks its signature and
installs it when Subline is idle. While speech is recognized, a video is
exported, a model downloads, a video plays or you edit a subtitle's text,
the update waits. Before the restart the list on the left shows "Updating to
version…" for a moment, then the same video opens again with its subtitles
and edits. If you quit Subline first, the new version goes in when it quits.

With "Install updates automatically" turned off in Settings (⌘,), Subline
shows a card with "Update", "Later" and "Skip" at the bottom of the list on
the left instead. "Later" hides the card for a day. To check by hand, choose
"Check for Updates…" in the Subline menu. The "Check for updates" switch in
Settings turns the checks off altogether.

OPEN AT LOGIN
Subline opens at login without a window or a Dock icon, to install updates
on time. macOS shows a notification when Subline adds itself to the login
items for the first time. The window appears when you open Subline from
Launchpad, Finder or the Dock, or open a video with it. To stop it, turn off
"Open at login" in Settings.

REQUIREMENTS
macOS 13.3 or later. Subline is fastest on Macs with Apple Silicon (M1 and
later). On Intel Macs recognition runs on the CPU and is noticeably slower.
